
Efe Dikmen
Istanbul, Turkey

# Vanilla Tree: a European Vanilla Options Calculator

#### Video Demo: https://youtu.be/r8DCBAgF1gs
#### Description: Hi my name is Efe Dikmen, I am from Istanbul, Turkey but I am at NY right now! This is my final project for CS50x and I had fun building it because I got to merge my coursework in finance with what I learned in this class! As a background, an option in finance is a contract that gives you the right to buy, a.k.a. a call, or sell, a.k.a. a put, an underlying security at a future point in time. A challenge is to calculate quantities like price and implied volatility for these contracts very fast, as hand calculating these quantities aren't very plausible. My app is intended for making these calculations quick. I use the Black Scholes model to price vanilla European options, which are options that can only be exercised at the end of their lives with the simplest payout structure. I will talk more about this part later, but let me first talk about the tools I used to code this app. I used HTML with Bootstrap templates for the front end, Python for mathematical calculations and other calculations, and Flask to connect the two and manage user experience in this project. In HTML, I mainly used buttons and input fields to take user input for option details, and tables to align the layouts of the input fields to make pages look more pleasing. I had to create a layout template to replicate in each page in order to have a navigation bar that can take users back to the beginning at any page. I used Flask to manage GET and POST requests, as well as to direct users to the correct input screens. The issue is that I offer calculations for options with three different underlying assets, and they don't require the same inputs, so I redirect users to one of six different pages based on their input in the index page with Flask. I also use a lot of helper functions I coded in Python to calculate prices and implied volatilities. For example, I also used object oriented programming to be able to tinker with the Black Scholes equation to be able to price futures options or FX options as I had to make slight adjustments to the equations for different underlying assets. I used scipy stats for the normal CDF and math library for some statistical functions to carry out calculations for Black Scholes. I implemented Newton's method to find the implied volatility based on a given price, for which I have to create an option object for each iteration and set a tolerance level to ensure convergence. For any weird behavior, I built in sanity checks in case the implied volatility comes out to be less than 0 or infinity. My initial guess for the Newton's method is based on Brenner Subrahmanyam (1988)'s estimate for the implied volatility of an at the money call, which hopefully minimizes the iterations needed for convergence. As for future steps, I can beautify the interface more than it currently is. There might also be a way to unify all six screens into one, as inputs for options with different underlyings don't vary much. I could also use lookup tables for normal distribution CDF to increase the speed of my app instead of scipy stats.